DAC Technologist Panel "The IC Nanometer  Race ? What Will it Take to Win" 
 
Chair: 
Walden C. Rhines 
Mentor Graphics 
Wilsonville, Oregon  Organizer: 
Laura Parker 
Mentor Graphics 
Wilsonville, Oregon
Panelists: 
Gadi Singer 
Intel Corporation 
Santa Clara, California 
Philippe Magarshack 
STMicroelectronics 
Crolles cedex, France   
Dr. Dennis Buss 
Texas Instruments, Inc. 
Dallas, Texas
Dr. Fu-Chieh Hsu 
Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company  Hsinchu, Taiwan, R.O.C. 
 
Dr. Ho-Kyu Kang 
Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd. Seoul, Korea 
 
Abstract: 
Creating ICs in the nanometer age is a high-stakes race that 
few companies can afford to compete in ? and even fewer 
can win.  Hear how senior technologists from the world?s 
top technology companies are striving to improve their 
chances of success.  Will leakage constraints force powersensitive applications to stay with older technologies, or will 
there be a bifurcation to a new process technology?  Will 
ballooning capital equipment expenses delay new capacity 
or price out design rules for mainstream applications?  Will 
silicon-on-insulator and new device structures like FinFETs 
force rethinking of design, modeling and simulation 
methodologies?  And which EDA technologies, delivered 
when, will be critical for victory?  
 These senior technologists, from some of the biggest 
companies in the high tech industry, will discuss and debate 
how they think the overall industry will successfully 
transition to the nanometer age.   Specific examples from the 
technologists? broad exposure to industry trends and 
competitors will help illu strate their forecasts and 
predictions. 
Categories and Subject Descriptors  
Hardware, integrated circuits 
General Terms: 
Design, economics, management 
Keywords: Hardware 
 
  Some of the issues for discussion include: 
New Technology Nodes?When will they 
debut? 
There has been considerable debate whether Moore?s Law is 
still in effect or not.  The panel will discuss the outlook for 
ramp-up of 65nm and 45nm based products.  Specifically, 
how broadly will these process nodes be adopted and where 
among applications will the greatest value be perceived. 
 
ASIC Design vs. Structured ASIC vs. FPGA 
Design 
Rising design and prototyping costs for nanometer design 
appear to be driving reduced design starts in the 
semiconductor industry.  With current cost estimates for a 
complex ASIC/SOC greater than $30M, fewer and fewer 
products can accommodate the required life-time unit 
shipments to justify such exorbitant design costs.
 
If this trend continues, will it drive the need for 
abstraction?including higher-level languages, platformbased design?leading to the adoption of ESL by 
mainstream designers?   Perhaps it is time to scale back 
from full custom ASICs and in
stead aggressively pursue the 
structured and platform ASIC approaches.  But are 
structured ASICS on the decline  considering the notable exit 
of some major companies support this approach?  And will 
FPGA design ever become cost effective? 
 
Verification Challenge 
It is now possible to have hundreds of millions of transistors 
on nanometer ICs, making timely verification impossible 
with current verification techniques.  This is driving the 
need for advanced techniques like high-level verification,  
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). 
DAC 2006 , July 24 28, 2006, San Francisco, California, USA. 
ACM 1-59593-381-6/06/0007. 
6.1 
77

assertions and coverage tools.  More specifically, the 
question needs to be asked why existing testbench tools and 
languages are failing.  Although some view the verification 
Language Wars as necessary, will they instead become a 
war of attrition?  
 
Power is Critical 
Temperatures of SoC/ASICs are around the hot-plate level 
due to the exponential rise in leakage current with subnanometer IC structures.  Change s are needed at all levels of 
IC design to lower power consumption.  For example, new 
architectures such as multi-c ore processing are minimizing 
power requirements at the macro level.   At the interconnect 
level, designers are employing techniques such as reduced 
operating voltages and lower capacitances.  Then at the 
process level, new structures such as double-gate FinFETs 
and strained silicon might be the answer.   
Will all this be enough to re duce power with nanometer 
ICs? Or will leakage constraints force power-sensitive 
applications to stay with older technologies?  
 
Yields are Dropping 
Manufacturing Yield is dropping significantly in the 
nanometer nodes.  A whole new set of tools are emerging to 
address yield issues including RET, OPC and design for 
manufacturing (DFM).  But this raises the question:  who is 
responsible for DFM?the designer or the manufacturer?  
And who should shoulder the cost of adopting DFM 
technology? 
 
Analog, Mixed Signal 
As nanometer technology allows more of system design is 
captured in a single IC, designers are dealing with 
analog/digital, RF and analog effects in their designs.  
Incorporating analog into digital designs is driving 
integrated mixed-signal design approaches.  How broadly 
will this effect design flows?  Namely, will companies 
change their methodologies to incorporate true mixed-signal 
approaches vs. integrating verified analog blocks into digital 
designs? 
Analog, mixed signal and RF have driven an increasing 
share of fabless start-ups, as we ll as designs at established 
companies. Is this a continuing trend?  
Larger Industry Questions 
As the industry moves into the nanometer realm, will it 
fundamentally change how we do business?  The number of 
new fabless start-ups has been  relatively stable in recent 
years, yet some analysts are  predicting a significant decline. 
Will the number of fabless start-ups increase or decrease in 
the coming year?  
IDM's are claiming a significant advantage in the ability to 
implement new design-for-manufacturing technology. Do 
they really have an advantage over foundries or is it the 
other way around?  
Regionally, where will the growth in semiconductors and 
electronic systems be the st rongest? Japan semiconductors 
appear to be in a strong recovery.  Will that continue?   
Various predictions for the Asian share of the 
semiconductor market in the next five years will be debated.  
And what's driving Europe?  Will the spin offs of Infineon 
Memory and Philips Semiconductor reduce or increase the 
market share of European companies?   As for innovation, 
where are the cutting edge innovations coming from?from 
bigger companies or startups and from what region in the 
world? 
 
Intriguing EDA Questions 
Although the semiconductor industry has been growing, the 
EDA industry has not.  The panelists will offer differing 
opinions for why this is so.  More importantly, what's the 
attitude of semiconductor and electronics people toward 
their EDA suppliers?  
Will designers ever really adopt a broader set of tools (i.e. 
more than just synthesis/place & route)?  And who will they 
get them from?  Perhaps it is time that EDA move away 
from its traditional focus on leading edge design and create 
tools for the mainstream. 
Then there is the influence of clusters on electronics (i.e. 
Asia/consumer, Europe/wireless, America/computer.)  Is 
this real?  And if so, will it continue and how it is shaping 
electronics? 
Last but not least, there is the ongoing debate about 
engineering talent:  where is it coming from and is it on the 
decline or increasing.  Issues th at are fueling this discussion 
include skill specialization, regional differences and whether 
there is enough available talent to fill the needed electronics 
capability. 
 
78