1 
 1
Panel: How Will the Fabless Model Survive? 
Chair 
Don Clark 
Wall Street Journal 
Organizer 
Riko Radojcic 
Qualcomm.
  
Thomas Hartung 
X-FAB Semiconductor Foundries AG 
Mark Bohr 
Intel Corporation 
 Ana Hunter  
Samsung Semiconductor Inc 
Brad Paulsen  
TSMC NA 
 Felicia James  
Cadence Design Systems 
Nick Yu  
Qualcomm 
ABSTRACT 
The fabless model was traditionally enabled through clean 
interfaces ? both in technical and business terms ? between 
foundries and fabless se miconductor companies.  However, with 
advanced geometry and analog/ mixed-signal process nodes, the 
technical challenges have been greatly magnified, so that 
successful semiconductor de sign requires intimate cooptimization of design and ma nufacturing, infringing upon those 
clean interfaces.  The panel presents views to these challenges and 
specifically how companies are planning to address them. 
Categories and Subject Descriptors 
B.m  Miscellaneous  
General Terms: Management 
Keywords: Business, DFM, Foundry, Fabless 
Position Statements: 
Panelists have provided their  position statements (see below) 
outlining their opinions. In the panel, each panelist will give no 
more than three specific takeaway points that designers must 
consider while analyzing their designs. 
1. Mark Bohr: 
 The fabless Model will continue  to survive. New markets based 
on new applications will continue  to emerge. Fabless ?design 
houses? have demonstrated the agility and speed required to 
satisfy them during the initial phases. Integrated-DeviceManufacturers (IDM?s), on the other hand, continue to be the 
most cost-efficient model to sa tisfy high-volume markets, once 
the application requirements are standardized. The IDM costefficiency comes from several f actors: 1. Innovations from wellfunded R&D; 2. Leading-edge fab capacity from capital 
investment; 3. In-house resources  such as design, design tools, 
mask, process integration and packaging.  Due to the increasing 
complexity as we continue to advance Moore?s Law, IDM?s 
advantages over Fabless Model will increase for all but niche 
markets. This will translate to not only better cost-efficiency, but 
also superior power or energy-efficiency for a broad-range of 
semiconductor products.
 
2. Thomas Hartung: 
Whether companies use deep sub-micron or analog features, the 
?one size fits all approach? is very tough to achieve. Switching 
from one supply to another has  become much more difficult. 
Whether the fabless model survives  or not is highly dependent on 
cooperation from both sides ? in cluding whether foundries are 
able to provide the right access and the right technology to enable 
fabless customers to address the  right market opportunities. While 
X-FAB believes it?s key that foundr y and fabless companies share 
a common understanding about the ma rket applications to be 
addressed, it is vital that the foundry provide access to technology 
that is generic enough to be manufacturable and flexible enough 
to provide fabless customers with the right features and options. 
Both the nanometer technologi es and high-performance analog 
features require intensive charact erization and technology features 
in order to provide fabless  customers efficient data for 
successfully designing functional  and parametrically correct 
silicon with minimum redesigns . Therefore, comprehensive 
physical design kits (PDKs) and according design and engineering 
support are key enablers for the success of fabless companiese. 
3. Ana Hunter: 
The foundry market is undergoing a transition, forcing more 
semiconductor companies to move towards more fab-lite or 
fabless strategies.  The inve stment required for advanced 
semiconductor manufacturing is  outpacing most companies? 
financial resources.  Market analysts believe a commercially 
viable deep sub-micron 300mm fa b requires a minimum $3B in 
capital investment.  To stay competitive and develop products 
using advanced process technol ogies, many companies are going 
to have to partner with a leading-edge foundry for those services.  
As a result of these and other  market forces, there will be a 
consolidation in the market a nd the fabless semiconductor model 
will continue as the predominant trend 
4. Felicia James: 
As design teams face the challenges of delivering leading edge 
designs on advanced process node s such as 65 nm and beyond, 
there is no doubt that the interaction between the process and the 
design continues to increase.  Ju st as at earlier process nodes, 
EDA will continue to drive characteristics that have a more 
significant impact on creating successful designs as early into the 
design process as possible.   Any  step that today requires complex 
rule checking after completing a step is an obvious candidate for 
being moved into the design pro cess itself and not allowing those 
 
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). 
DAC 2006, July 24?28, 2006, San Francisco, California, USA. 
ACM 1-59593-381-6/06/0007.

2
types of errors to be created at all.  Integrated IDM?s do have an 
inherit advantage that the proce
ss development experts and design 
teams can easily exchange information as the new challenges are 
identified and resolved, but strong business economics will enable 
solutions that still support the foundry model.  Foundries can 
leverage deeper relationships with certain key customers as early 
adopters, and EDA can play a role in facilitating the exchange of 
more detailed physical data in cluding developing and supporting 
encrypted formats for sensitive data such as doping profiles that 
are needed to accurately model substrate noise 
5. Brad Paulsen : 
The emergence of consumer elect ronics as an industry driver 
increases the need for advanced  technology, but the economics of 
IC development presents a si gnificant challenge.  Innovative 
companies will lead by exploiting the foundry?s advanced 
technologies and high-yield,  high-volume manufacturing 
capabilities. Design-process integr ation, when based on a proven 
ecosystem, will provide the high value, low risk, and ease of use 
necessary to be first to market, firs t to volume, and first to money.  
Through strong partnerships with  leading-edge manufacturers and 
design services, fabless compan ies can remain on the innovative 
cutting edge for many years to come.. 
6. Nick Yu : 
The fabless business model will de finitely not only survive, but 
will thrive,  as the economic and technical factors that dictate the  need to amortize the cost of technology development and fab 
ownership across multiple entities are all accentuated at each 
successive technology node.  Howe
ver, the fabless model will 
bifurcate into two classes; one applicable to leading edge 
technology users, and one to the users of mature process 
technologies.  Leading edge tec hnology users, whether IDM or 
Fabless, experience a new class of challenges that dictate the need 
for tighter process-design integr ation, and more structured 
concurrent process and design  development. The traditional 
fabless business model does not easily accommodate these new 
requirements. The tighter inte gration required obviously has 
strong implications for technical end of the fabless-foundry 
relationship.  Thus developmen t methodologies on both, process 
and design end, need to accommodate changes to allow for global 
optimization of the end product, rather than just optimizing the 
process or the design. Hence syst ems, tools and practices that 
enable this will all have to be  developed ? as is currently 
happening in the physical DFM arena. Tighter process-design 
integration obviously also has st rong implications on the business 
end of the fabless-foundry relations hip, but we do not foresee that 
the only way of managing the integration is through a 
conventional IDM business model.   We anticipate evolution of an 
Integrated Fabless Manufactur er business model which will 
leverage the advantages of both approaches.